
---

{{int:version-credits-summary}}
WacOS (Linux based operating system) is a collaborative project released under the GNU General Public License v3. We would like to recognize the following names for their contribution to the product.

This comment block and this file (excluding author names) was modified from MediaWiki/CREDITS -->

== Maintainers ==
<!-- BEGIN MAINTAINERS LIST !-->

01. @seanpm2001 - Creator and primary maintainer of the WacOS operating system project
02. No other contributors as of Thursday, August 26th 2021

== Contributors ==
<!-- BEGIN CONTRIBUTOR LIST -->
01. @seanpm2001 (For creating the WacOS project, among many other software and media projects)
02. @GitHub (For GitHub, and for being the first host of this project)
03. @Apple (For MacOS, iOS, iPadOS, TvOS, WatchOS, and many other projects that inspired this project)
04. @S-Desktop-Environment (For the modified desktop environment used in this project)
05. @Microsoft (For saving Apple earlier on, without this, we wouldn't have iOS 6 and many other works of art, and my mid childhood would have been much different)
06. @WacOS-Dev (For the community developing this project, and this projects platform)
07. @VirtualBox (Not on GitHub, but they really helped get me into operating system preservation and virtualization, and were a stepping stone that inspired this project)
08. @Torvalds (For the Linux kernel, without it, this project would have no good base, and I would be stuck with little freedom on Windows)
09. @Dennis_Ritchie (Not on GitHub, but big thanks to him for creating the C programming language, and many other glorious contributions to computer science)
10. @Ken (Ken Thompson, big thanks to him for co-creating the C programming language, and many other glorious contributions to computer science)
11. @BjarneStrousnip (Not on GitHub, but big thanks to him for creating the C++ programming language that built many projects)
12. @Python (For the Python programming language, my favorite programming language that made computer science more tolerable, and gave me lots of experiences and lots to work with)
13. @Git (For the Git version control system used on this project)
14. No other contributors as of Thursday, August 26th 2021

---
